so this is part 2 of chapter 5 of the
beginning of infinity the reality of
abstractions might better be called an
appendices because there's not much left
for me to read of chapter 5 but there's
a lot more to say to do with David
deutsches views on the nature of
mathematics and the nature of
mathematics is the title of chapter 10
of David's first book the fabric of
reality and I find that there's a lot of
crossover here in the material there's a
lot of new material in Chapter five of
the beginning of infinity but there are
certain themes that are touched upon in
the fabric of reality that don't quite
get a voice in the beginning of infinity
David recently gave a talk at his direct
Prize medal award ceremony in which he
articulated
one of the most profound differences
that David as a philosopher has with the
mathematicians David has some really
unique views when it comes to the nature
of mathematics and it connects directly
to the reality of abstractions and to
his work of course on quantum
computation now I want to try and
explain why and I suppose in part this
will be a personal reflection like many
people I was inculcated with some
supernatural ideas as a child you tend
to learn about some aspects of religious
mysticism and you learn about fairy
tales sometimes these are presented as
facts and this has the effect that when
you begin to take on a more scientific
rational view of the world and a more
reasoned approach to these matters you
tend to relinquish a whole bunch of this
some people not only relinquish these
beliefs in the supernatural but they
become actively hostile
to the notion that anything is
supernatural at all or anything could
possibly be supernatural and I think
that's quite right but this impulse this
reasonable rejection of the supernatural
has a tendency to misfire
now Richard Dawkins in the salvage Jane
speaks about genetic misfiring some
examples of genetic misfiring are things
like the so called altruism gene so the
altruism gene is supposed to be the gene
that
causes social animals like ourselves to
help others but sometimes this could
misfire if it's all about the gene
propagating through the environment then
if there is an altruism gene in a gene
that causes social animals to help one
another not all members of the species
will possess the gene and so therefore
if an altruistic member of the species
decides to help to be altruistic towards
a member who isn't such an altruist so
if there is an hour truism gene or
something like this this can perhaps
misfire misfire in human beings let's
say as it could cause you to help
someone who refuses to help anyone else
in other words the altruism gene might
in some situations actively work to
cause itself to be removed from the gene
pool by helping those who help no one
altruism could be blind in that kind of
way or the gene that causes the desire
for sex the whole purpose of which is to
encourage reproduction of a species or
reproduction of genes in general this
could misfire because it's still that
the desire for sex is still there even
in the presence of contraception and
even in homosexual members of the
species so the desire doesn't actually
help reproduction in some cases memes
rather than genes might do the same
thing so rejecting the supernatural
might be a meme that we all become
inculcated with all that we all learn at
some point after we give up on let's say
God and become atheists those of us who
have become atheists but a misfiring of
that idea a misfiring of the idea that
one should reject supernatural
explanations could be reject all
non-physical explanations or reject all
explanations cast in terms of things
that include non-physical entities
that's a misfiring because not all
non-physical things are supernatural and
not everything in the universe is
physical in particular the laws of
physics are not physical numbers are not
physical mathematics is not the study of
physical things but abstract things and
so on all of these things are
non-physical part
of abstract reality abstractions have a
reality and this reality can have
effects on the physical world as we saw
in Chapter five now there is one kind of
abstraction that is particularly
interesting and that is the abstract
reality described by mathematics not all
abstractions are mathematical but the
mathematical ones are the ones that
often get the most attention and there
are misconceptions on both sides and
david has recently spoken publicly about
what he calls the mathematicians
misconception and we'll come to this
shortly but essentially we have two
groups of people once more on the one
side we have people who think that
mathematics is about abstract entities
and we reason about those entities using
mathematical intuition and this is
somehow done in a kind of abstract space
and as such what is able to be proved
there is proved with certainty and so
mathematics can deliver us with
rock-solid true proofs mathematical
knowledge on this account is of an
altogether different kind than other
kinds of knowledge mathematical
knowledge confers certain truths upon
its conclusions on this view or at least
truth of a kind that is more reliable or
more robust or foundational than other
kinds of knowledge so this is one side
of the debate it might be called
platonic idealism the other side of the
debate is that everything in reality is
physical there is only a physical
reality and nothing else
we are just atoms moving through the
void on this account mathematics is a
kind of useful fiction it happens to
describe parts of this physical reality
but it cannot possibly have a reality
apart from the material world this is
sometimes called physicalism or
materialism either way this is of course
a form of reductionism if sometimes
saying is the irrational way to be it
rejects everything except what science
supposedly deems is real well usually
through observations so it's also a kind
of empiricism so we have to quiet
rational doctrines here at word scene
but yet they both seem to contradict
each other brilliant mathematicians who
believe in perfect mathematical ideals
that they can have knowledge of through
their mathematical intuition and
that leads them down the path of certain
conclusions and on the other hand
hard-nosed materialism of the scientific
types say only physical stuff exists so
if you're a person who likes reason you
seem a little bit stuck
do you prefer brilliant mathematicians
or do you like hard-nosed physics types
so let me steal a famous line from David
Deutsch here if you regard these two
positions as being deeply informative of
your rational worldview then quote then
they seem a little bit to conflict with
each other
but that does not prevent them from both
being completely false and they are so
David walks the line between these two
positions on the one hand mathematics is
indeed about perfect ideal forms but
that is not what mathematicians can
actually discover it's rather like the
laws of physics
now they exist but what we have our
explanations of the laws of physics
imperfect our knowledge of them is
subject to change and improvement and on
the other hand as chapter 5 is argued at
length it cannot be the case that
reality consists only of atoms
collections of atoms arranged themselves
into patterns that are more than the sum
of their parts that's an abstraction the
reason that domino falls or doesn't in
Hofstede is argument go back to the last
video for this one it's because the
input is either prime or it isn't it's
nothing to do with the laws of motion
acting on atoms in the void the
explanation was 641 is prime it's got
nothing to do with quantum theory or
general relativity those are
explanations of everything regardless
but cannot explain why in that situation
so David recent talk called the
mathematicians misconception given at
the direct prize award ceremony was an
explanation of how proof must be a
physical process now this is an amazing
insight and it's very counterintuitive
it's even caused people to have strong
emotional reactions especially
mathematicians so what is the
mathematicians misconception well it's
the denial that proof is physical
now this claim arises from mathematical
intuition the claim that because
mathematical objects are platonic ideals
they're not made of atoms so far this is
true that when we reason about them and
reasoning on this view is a non physical
process that what we get is some kind of
mathematically ideal knowledge the
problem here is the step reason about
when a mathematician reasons what they
are doing is thinking you're using their
brain it's an activity for the mind now
as I've argued before the mind is a kind
of software and it runs on the hardware
that is the brain or if you don't like
that or want some other language
reasoning even mathematical reasoning is
something the brains do our brains are
physical objects they obey physical laws
there's no escaping this and so the
repertoire of possible computations is
in one-to-one correspondence with those
of a universal Turing machine and a
universal Turing machine is the
foundation the theoretical foundation
underpinning what all really existing
physical classical computers are so the
repertoire of all possible computations
that a brain can do is in one-to-one
correspondence with those of a universal
Turing machine there's nothing universal
Turing machine can do that a person
cannot and there's nothing a person can
do that a universal Turing machine
cannot now the first part of that is
easy to show a universal Turing machine
just has to be able to write read and
erase symbols on a piece of paper that's
it now a person can do that a universal
Turing machine just has to be able to
write and read and erase symbols on a
piece of paper and be able to move from
one square to the next that's it now
personally to do that therefore a person
is a universal Turing machine done by
the way a person is more than just a
universal Turing machine but I don't
need that for the argument here now the
other half of what I said is about
whether or not there's anything a person
can do that a universal Turing machine
cannot do well in terms of computation a
universal Turing machine is universal
precisely because it can compute
anything that's computer
now if a person can do something else in
terms of thinking that a universal
Turing machine cannot this means that
thing is a non computable thing but now
here's the kicker David Deutsch approved
that given computers of physical objects
and obey the laws of physics then the
repertoire of all the possible motions
of a universal quantum computer must
include the motions of any physical
object that is a quantum computer can
simulate the deepest laws we have namely
the laws of quantum theory and all
matter obeys those laws that includes
brains and so whatever a brain can do
because it's just made of matter so too
can a universal quantum computer and
therefore we have the other half of our
requirement there's nothing a human
brain or a mind can possibly compute
that a universal computer cannot and
what a universal computer can compute is
all the things that are possibly
computable a mathematicians intuition
cannot escape this the intuition itself
is a computation of a kind a mental
activity must be it could be simulated
by a computer and what a quantum
computer does like everything else in
the universe is about physical laws and
thus if the laws of physics were
different what could be computed would
be different now proof proving something
is what mathematicians do they prove
things about numbers about abstract
objects when they complete a proof in
their mind it's their mind that has
computed it but the possible proof
cannot be of anything the laws of
physics prohibit but the possible proof
cannot be of anything that the laws of
physics have prohibited being proved so
there are many statements indeed the
overwhelming majority of mathematical
statements that are not provable this is
where girdle's incompleteness theorems
come in one of the incompleteness
theorems say there are statements that
are true in mathematics but which we
cannot possibly prove and there's a
proof of that
that's girdle's incompleteness theorem
but that is only the case because the
laws of physics are such that what can
be proved prohibits us from ever finding
the proof all those things
Turing's version of this is that there
are some statements that are not
computable or decidable but this is
equivalent so there's a difference
between what's true and what's provable
that's the point of both chewing n
girdle's proofs and by the way you can
have systems such as so-called
sentential or propositional logic and in
these systems the axioms allow you to
prove everything that is true within
that system girdle's incompleteness
theorem is called the incompleteness
theorem because if you have a richer
system of logic something like simple
arithmetic then you end up being able to
generate true statements that cannot be
proved true as such and this is the case
for the overwhelming majority of logical
systems that you can create
[Music]
therefore the overwhelming majority of
mathematical claims you can make will
not have proofs you won't be able to
decide with the true or false or if
they're true you won't you'll have a
proof that they're true the relevance of
all this for here now is that
mathematical objects perfectly true
statements are things we only have
access to through proof which is a type
of computer
but computation requires a computer and
computers of physical objects are baying
the laws of physics which mandate that
we cannot ever hope to have error free
computation error is just a part of
physical reality now I shouldn't mention
as an aside that david's great
contribution here was a proof of the
cheering principle namely that there can
be a physical object whose repertoire of
possible motions contains the motions of
all other objects
that's not exactly his words but this is
now called the church-turing Deutsch
principle and david has said that really
Ada Lovelace deserves credit for this
also
so to labor the point the claim from
some like some mathematicians and here
I'm drawing directly on David to talk at
his direct prize award ceremony seems to
be that out there in abstract space
there is some other definition of proof
such that it's not physical so this is
the mathematicians claim there is
another way to prove stuff in abstract
space that's not physics but if some
process that doesn't conform to that
definition was a way of knowing about
some necessary truth that process
wouldn't be a proof of that truth the
repertoire of integer functions that
chewing machines and quantum computers
are able to compute is the same that is
different speed but we only know they're
different speed from quantum theory and
so when mathematicians attempt to say
that they have an intuition that says
that they can prove things that in such
a way that they're able to get their
error frame it's not subset that the
method of proof is not in some way
subservient to our knowledge of the laws
of physics they're wrong because all
proof even intuitions that all mental
processes including their own intuitions
arise from the activity of the brain
computing stuff and when you compute
stuff you're performing a physical
process that's all that can be happening
according to David Deutsch as proof of
how quantum computation works and the
relationship between computation which
includes all intuitions or mental
activities all possible methods of proof
the relationship between that and the
laws of physics
the laws of physics constrain what
computation is and all mental activities
including all intuitions and all methods
of proof are physical okay so now let's
return directly to Chapter five of the
beginning of infinity the reality of
abstractions and it's taking note of the
concluding remarks and how they
synthesize with what I've just been
talking about primarily drawn from
David's talk about the mathematicians
misconception and David writes near the
end of this chapter Beauty right and
wrong prime ality infinite sets they all
exist objectively but not physically
what does that mean certainly they can
affect you as examples like Hofstadter
show but apparently not in the same
sense that physical objects to you
cannot trip over one of them in the
street however there is less to that
distinction than our empiricism biased
common sense assumes first of all being
affected by a physical object means that
something about the physical object has
caused a change via the laws of physics
or a quick or equivalently that the laws
of physics have caused a change via that
object but causation and the laws of
physics are not themselves physical
objects there are abstractions and our
knowledge of them comes just as for all
other abstractions from the fact that
our best explanations invoke them
progress depends on explanation and
therefore trying to conceive of the
world as merely a sequence of events
with unexplained regularities would
entail giving up on progress this
argument that abstractions really exist
does not tell us what they exist as for
instance which of them are purely
emergent aspects of others and which
exist independently of the others
I'll pause there so it tells us that
abstract entities have an independent
existence but we don't know what they
are exactly so when people ask what is
the real nature of numbers abstract
though they are it's very difficult to
say anything more precise than that
they're not physical but they do exist
and if someone asks well where do they
exist well the answer is simple they're
not physical so there is nowhere that
applies to them where asks for a point
in space and spaces something that's
part of the physical universe and so
asking about a where for a number is
rather like asking what happened before
the beginning of time
grammatically the sentence might make
sense but logically it refers to nothing
I'll continue David writes would the
laws of morality be the same if the laws
of physics were different if they were
such that knowledge could be obtained by
blind obedient to Authority then
scientists would have to avoid what we
think of as the values of scientific
inquiry in order to make progress my
guess is that morality is more
autonomous than that and so it makes
sense to say that the laws of physics
would be immoral and as I remark in
chapter 4 to imagine the laws of physics
that will be more moral than the real
ones now if there's ever being a Paul
say this is me speaking if there is ever
being a more non relativist conception
of morality I haven't read it what David
is saying there is that morality has an
independent it possibly his guess is
that it has an independent existence
aside from the laws of physics so it
doesn't matter what your laws of physics
are it doesn't matter if you are some
kind of super alien that has a bird's
eye view of
the mega verse of versions of the
universe with different physical laws or
different kinds of multiverses other
universes with different physical laws
that meant you would have to commit
immoral acts in order to make progress
would be immoral that there is an
independence to morality that stands
apart from the laws of physics now
David's guests and I'm sure this is
David's guess is that at least I guess
this is David's guess is that the laws
of physics that we do have are not
amoral that in fact in order to make
progress in this universe that you have
to be a moral person you have to act
morally that immorality in fact is the
way in which we don't make progress in
fact that must be the case because for
example we need to be able to speak the
truth we need to be able to tell the
truth in order to make progress that
reality is connected to truth in some
way and so our articulation of the truth
is the thing that allows us to make
progress and solve problems so our laws
of physics are definitely moral we can
see that I'll continue with what David
writes the reach of ideas into the world
of abstractions is a property of the
knowledge that they contain not of the
brain in which they happen to be
instantiated a theory can have infinite
reach even if the person who originated
it is unaware that it does however a
person is an abstraction - and there is
a kind of infinite reach that is unique
to people the reach of the ability to
understand explanations and this ability
is itself an instance of the wider
phenomena of universality - which I turn
next
now I won't turn there next I'm going to
turn in fact to chapter 10 of the fabric
of reality because I'd like to stay with
this theme of mathematics and the theme
of the reality of abstractions and
really focus on that part of the reality
of abstractions that personally I find
most interesting and a lot of people do
as well about abstract entities there
are mathematical entities what
mathematics is about how we can come to
understand what mathematics is about and
how we can explain what mathematical
entities are and a little more on this
the nature of proof so in the fabric of
reality chapter 10 page 222 at the very
beginning of the chapter David writes
now he speaks he's spoken about in the
fabric of reality previously before we
get to chapter 10 obviously quantum
physics and evolution and in knowledge
and so what he writes here is the fabric
of reality that I have been describing
so far has been the fabric of physical
reality yet I have also have heard
freely two entities that are nowhere to
be found in the physical world
abstractions such as numbers and
infinite sets of computer programs and
all of the laws of physics themselves
physical entities in the sense that
rocks and planets are so again if you
have if you have bought the beginning
infinity if you're a fan at the
beginning of infinity you can see
there's a lot of supplementary material
here that really helps with the
beginning of infinity so the fabric of
reality fantastic book and everyone
should get it so I'm not going to read
the whole chapter here I'm going to skip
forward to the parts that I find out
relevant to chapter 5 the next part is
David asked the question to abstract non
physical entities exists are they are
part of the fabric of reality I'm not
interested here in issues of mere word
usage it is obvious that numbers the
laws of physics and so on do exist in
some senses and not in others the
substantive question is this how are we
to understand such entities which of
them are merely convenient forms of
words referring ultimately only to
ordinary physical reality
which are merely ephemeral features of
our culture which are arbitrary like the
rules of a trivial game that we need
only look up and which if any can be
explained only in a way that attributes
an independent existence to them things
of this last type must be part of the
fabric of reality as defined in this
book because one would have to
understand them in order to understand
everything that is understood now the
next part that I won't read is David
speaking about what's called dr.
Johnson's criterion and dr. Johnson's
criterion is whether or not an entity
kicks back and by kick back that would
mean reacts in such a way or behaves in
such a way or you're able to find out
something such that it was unexpected
that's surprising and this is why we
regard numbers as being absolutely real
because merely by defining a few axioms
the axioms of arithmetic you can then go
on to discover amazing things that are
completely unexpected a very simple one
is the distribution of prime numbers
it's completely unexpected we don't know
what it is we don't know what the next
prime number will be we have to go out
and search so having defined these
axioms it then seems to reveal this
reality of infinite complexity and so
therefore numbers are of a kind of
abstract reality according to that last
question that David asked right there he
said which if any can be explained only
in a way that attributes an independent
existence to them so that would be
numbers they have an independent
existence the next highest prime number
that we find no one knows when we'll
find that next prime number and no one
knows what it is
but can anyone doubt that it exists and
if it exists in what sense does it exist
it just exists not physically it's not
in fact it the the biggest prime numbers
the biggest prime numbers don't kind of
have any physical meaning they can't
possibly label anything in physical
reality because they're so large that
they you know orders of magnitude bigger
than all of the particle the number of
particles in the universe
and so David writes thus abstract
mathematical entities we think we are
familiar with can nevertheless surprise
or disappoint us they can pop up
unexpectedly in new geysers or disguises
they can be explicable and then later
conform to new explanations so they are
complex and autonomous and therefore by
dr. Johnson's criterion we must conclude
that they are real since we cannot
understand them either as being part of
ourselves or as being part of something
else that we already understood but we
can understand them as independent
entities so we must conclude they are
real independent entities nevertheless
abstract entities are intangible they do
not kick back physically in the sense
that a stone does so experiment and
observation cannot possibly play quite
the same role in mathematics as they do
in science in mathematics proof plays
that role dr. Johnson stone kicked back
by making his foot rebound prime numbers
kicked back when we proved something
unexpected about them especially if we
can go on to explain it to in the
traditional view the crucial difference
between proof and experiment is that a
proof makes no reference to the physical
world we can perform a proof in the
privacy of our own minds or we can
perform a proof trapped inside a virtual
reality generator rendering the wrong
physics provided that we follow the
rules of mathematical inference we
should come up with the same answer as
anyone else and again the prevailing
view is that apart from the possibility
of making blunders when we have proved
something we know with absolute
certainty that it is true mathematicians
are rather proud of this absolute
certainty and scientists tend to be a
little envious of it for in science
there is no way I've been certain of any
proposition however well one's theories
explain existing observations at any
moment someone may make a new
inexplicable observation that casts
doubt on the whole of the current
explanatory structure worse someone may
reach a better understanding that
explains not only all existing
observations but also why the previous
explanations seem to work but are
nevertheless quite wrong Galileo for
instance found a new explanation of the
age-old observation that the ground
beneath our feet is at rest an
explanation that involved the ground
actual
moving virtual reality which can make
one environment seem to be another
underlines the fact that when
observation is the ultimate arbiter
between theories there can never be any
certainty than an existing explanation
however obvious is even remotely true
but when proof is the arbiter it is
supposed there can be certainty I'll
pause there there we have David setting
up the mathematicians misconception for
the first so he set this up decades ago
now but I'll skip a bit and David
concludes after writing a little more
for the idea that mathematics yield
certainties is a myth too since ancient
times the idea that mathematical
knowledge has a privileged status has
often been associated with the idea that
some abstract entities at least are not
merely part of the fabric of reality but
or even more real than the physical
world Pythagoras believed that
regularities in nature the expression of
mathematical relationships between
natural numbers all things our number
was the slogan this was not meant quite
literally but Plato went further and
effectively denied that the physical
world is real at all I'm skipping a bit
and David talks a little bit more about
Plato and he then writes on Plato
however the problem he posed of how we
can possibly have knowledge that alone
certainty of abstract entities is real
enough and some elements of his proposed
solution have been part of the
prevailing theory of knowledge ever
since in particular the core idea of a
mathematical knowledge and scientific
knowledge come from different sources
and that the special source of
mathematics confers absolute certainty
upon it is to this day accepted
uncritically by virtually all
mathematicians nowadays they call this
source mathematical intuition but it
plays exactly the same role as Plato's
memories of the realm of forms there
have been many bitter controversies
about precisely which types of perfectly
reliable knowledge our mathematical
intuition can be expected to reveal in
other words mathematicians agree the
mathematical intuition is a source of
absolute certainty but they
agree about what mathematical intuition
tells them obviously this is a recipe
for infinite unresolved controversy
inevitably most such controversies have
centered on the validity or otherwise of
various methods of proof one controversy
concerned so-called imaginary numbers
imaginary numbers are the square roots
of negative numbers new theorems about
ordinary real numbers were proved by
appealing at intermediate stages of a
proof to the properties of imaginary
numbers for example the first theorems
about the distribution of prime numbers
were proved in this way but some
mathematicians objected to imaginary
numbers on the grounds that they were
not real current terminology still
reflects the old controversy even though
we now think that imaginary numbers are
just as real as real numbers
I expect their school teachers had told
them they were not allowed to take the
square root of minus 1 and consequently
they did not see why anyone else should
be allowed to either no doubt they
called this untradable impulse
mathematical intuition but other
mathematicians had different intuitions
they understood what the imaginary
numbers were and how they fitted in with
real numbers why they thought should one
not define new abstract entities to have
any properties one likes surely the only
legitimate grounds for forbidding this
would be that the required properties
were logically inconsistent surely the
only legitimate grounds for forbidding
this would be that their required
properties were logically inconsistent
that is essentially in the modern
consensus which the mathematician John
Horton Conway has robustly referred to
as the mathematicians liberation
movement admittedly no one had proved
that the system of imaginary numbers was
self consistent but then no one had
proved that the ordinary arithmetic of
the natural numbers was self consistent
either now I'm skipping a very
substantial number of pages here maybe
one day I'll go back and actually do the
fabric of reality in fact that that's
the plan I will do a series on the
fabric of reality once I've finished the
beginning of infinity this will take
many months and I've skipped forward a
number of pages and then David writes
thanks to girdle we now know there will
never be a fixed method of determining
whether a mathematical proposition is
true anymore than there is a fixed way
of determining whether a scientific
theory is true nor will there ever be a
fixed way of generating new mathematical
knowledge therefore progress in
mathematics will always depend on the
exercise of creativity it will always be
possible and necessary for
mathematicians to invent new types of
proof they will validate them by new
arguments and by new modes of
explanation depending upon their ever
improving understanding of the abstract
entities involved girdles own theorems
were a case in point to prove them he
had to invent a new method of proof I
said the method was based on the
diagonal argument but girdle extended
that argument in a new way nothing had
ever been proved in this way before no
rules of inference laid down by someone
who had never seen girdles method could
possibly have been prescient enough to
designate it as valid yet it is
self-evidently valid where did this
self-evident 'no scum from it came from
girls understanding of the nature of
proof girdles proofs are as compelling
as any in mathematics but only if one
first understands the explanation that
accommodates them so explanation does
after all play the same paramount role
in pure mathematics as it does in
science explaining and understanding the
world the physical world and the world
of mathematical abstractions is in both
cases the object of the exercise proof
and observation are merely the means by
which we check our explanations I'll
pause there isn't that amazing all the
way back in the fabric of reality 1997
we're getting a portent really of what
is to come with David's TED Talks what
is to come with David's next book and
what is to come with the vision and the
world view that he's gifted us with it's
it's it's it's here in its nascent form
in the fabric of really more than Nicene
form I mean he's really articulating it
clearly there's so much here of course
that it's easy to have missed it and I
admit the
having read it read the fabric reality
for the first time when it was published
in 1997 I didn't fully get the
centrality of explanation in science and
I didn't get it until the beginning of
infinity so I'm skipping forward a
little more this is still in chapter 10
skipping some more pages and David
writes it is often suggested that the
brain the human brain may be a quantum
computer and that it's intuitions
consciousness and problem-solving
abilities might depend on quantum
computations this could be so but I know
of no evidence and no convincing
argument that it is my bit is that the
brain considered as a computer there's a
classical one but that issue is
independent of Penrose ideas let's pause
there so he's just written a section
about Roger Penrose who does have this
theory that it could be the case that
the brain is a quantum computer computer
or at least relies on some kind of
quantum effects and I think there's a
number of scientists including
neuroscientists that kind of hint that
they think that this might be the case
but as David says has no real evidence
for that and there's this problem of
what - known as decoherence in
particular in order for us to have a
quantum computer that works we need to
be able to have quantum systems we need
to be able to have entanglement and
entanglement so far as we can tell at
the moment only works when temperatures
are sufficiently low such that noise
doesn't affect the system and the kinds
of technology that I've seen the
University of New South Wales here in
Sydney where I am is working on this the
kind of temperatures they need is very
very close to absolute zero I mean
they're operating at the some of the
coldest refrigeration on the planet in
order to get these things to work so
until we have a new theory of how to
build quantum computers really the
argument for the human brain being and
quantum computer is unconvincing
but David continues to write penrose is
not arguing that the brain is some sort
of universal computer differing from the
universal quantum computer by having a
larger repertoire of computations made
possible by new post quantum physics he
is arguing for a new physics that will
not support computational universality
so that under his new theory it will not
be possible to construe some of the
actions of the brain as computations at
all David writes I must admit that I
cannot conceive of such a theory however
fundamental breakthroughs do tend to be
hard to conceive of before they they
occur naturally it's hard to judge
Penrose Theory before he succeeds in
formulating it fully so that's a very
generous reading of Roger Penrose I'm
going to skip forward a few more pages
here and David writes Plato tells us
that since we have access only to
imperfect circles say we cannot thereby
obtain any knowledge of perfect circles
but why not exactly one might as well
say so we cannot discover the laws of
planetary motion because we do not have
access to real planets but only to
images of planets the Inquisition didn't
say this and as I have explained they
were wrong one might as well say it is
impossible to build accurate machine
tools because the first one would have
to be built with inaccurate machine
tools with the benefit of hindsight we
can see that this line of criticism
depends on a very crude picture of how
science works something like inductive
ISM which is hardly surprising since
Plato lived before anything that we
would recognize as science if say the
only way of learning about circles from
experience were to examine thousands of
physical circles and then from the
accumulated data to try to infer
something about their abstract to
Euclidean counterparts Plato would have
a point but if we form a hypothesis that
real circles resemble the abstract ones
in specified ways and we happen to be
right then we may well learn something
about the abstract circles by looking at
real ones in Euclidian geometry one
often uses diagrams to specify a
geometrical pattern or its solution
there is possible there is a possibility
of error he
such a method of description if the
imperfections of circles in the diagram
give a misleading impression for example
if two circles seem to touch each other
when they do not but if one understands
the relationship between real circles
and imperfect circles one can with care
eliminate all such errors if one does
not understand that relationship it is
practically impossible to understand you
clearly in geometry at all the
reliability of the knowledge of a
perfect circle that one can gain from a
diagram of the circle depends entirely
on the accuracy of the hypothesis that
the two resemble each other in relevant
ways such a hypothesis referring to a
physical object the diagram amounts to a
physical theory and can never be known
with certainty but that does not as
Plato would have it preclude the
possibility of learning about perfect
circles from experience it just
precludes the possibility of certainty
that should not worry anyone as looking
for a certainty but for explanations or
pause there so that's great so how do we
know about these mathematical entities
well because we have theories we have
theories that arise from our study of
physically existing circles let's say
and then we can prove things about those
physically existing circles that relate
to ideal platonic forms in some way and
this is true of all mathematical
platonic ideals
so mathematics is about these abstract
entities we only have access to the
physical versions of they're old but
there is a relationship between and we
know what the relationship is because we
conjecture explanations between the
perfect abstract entities and our
physical reality David continues skip a
little and he writes let us re examine
another assumption of Plato's the
assumption that we do not have access to
perfection in the physical world he may
be right that we shall not find perfect
honor or justice and he is certainly
right that we shall not find the laws of
physics or the set of all natural
numbers but we can find a perfect hand
in bridge or the perfect move in a given
chess position that is to say we can
find physical objects or processes that
perfectly possess the properties of the
specified abstractions we can learn
chess just as well with a real
as we could with a perfect form of a
chess set the fact that a knight is
chipped does not make the check make it
delivers any less final as it happens a
perfect year clearance circle can be
made available to our senses Plato did
not realize this because he did not know
about virtual reality it would not be
difficult to program the virtual reality
generators I envisage back in a previous
chapter such that a user could
experience perfect geometrical forms I'm
skipping a fair bit more there's a lot
of really good stuff here that that yes
I'll have to return to a little later
day but I just want to get to this
mathematic mathematicians misconception
and the relevant material about the
reality of abstractions and so it's
almost unreachable page 246 of the
fabric of reality and David writes a
conventional symbolic proof seems at
first sign to have a quite a different
character from a hands-on virtual
reality sort of proof but we now see
that they are related in the ways that
computations are to physical experiments
any physical experiment can be regarded
as a computation and any computation is
a physical experiment in both sorts of
proof physical entities whether in
virtual reality or not are manipulated
according to rules in both cases the
physical entities represent the abstract
entities of interest and in both cases
the reliability of the proof depends on
the truth of the theory that physical
and abstract entities do indeed share
the appropriate properties so pausing
there a mathematical proof is about
abstract entities but we use physical
objects in order to represent those
abstract entities
now david says he writes we can also see
from the above discussion that proof is
a physical process in fact a proof is a
type of computation proving a
proposition means perform your
computation which if one has done it
correctly establishes that the
proposition is true when we use the word
proof to denote an object such as an ink
on paper text we mean that the object
can be used as a program for recreating
a computation of the appropriate kind it
follows that neither the theorems of
mathematics nor the process of
mathematical proof nor the experience of
mathematical intuition confers any
certainty nothing does a mathematical
knowledge may just like our scientific
knowledge be deep and broad it may be
subtle and wonderfully explanatory it
may be uncontroversially accepted but it
cannot be certain no one can guarantee
that a proof that was previously thought
to be valid well not one day turned out
to contain a profound misconception made
to seem natural by a previously
unquestioned self-evident assumption
about either the physical world or about
the abstract world or about the way in
which some physical and abstract
entities are related skipping a little
more and I think that this is where
again on a personal note I really had
that sense on reading this chapter for
the first time over the ground falling
out from underneath you this sense of
vertigo and falling that previously
throughout school and high school and
university I really was inculcated with
the idea that mathematics was this solid
unchanging domain of certainty and then
I think I read this
David wrote a very similar Mis
classification has been caused by the
fundamental mistake the mathematician
since antiquity have been making about
the very nature of their subject namely
the mathematical knowledge is more
certain than other forms of knowledge
having made that mistake no one has a
choice but to classify proof theory as a
part of mathematics for a mathematical
theorem could not be certain if the
theory that justifies its method of
proof or itself uncertain but as we have
just seen proof theory is not a branch
of mathematics it is a science proofs
are not abstract there is no such thing
as abstractly proving something just
that there is no such thing as
abstractly calculating or abstractly
computing something one can of course
define a class of abstract entities and
call them proofs but those proofs cannot
verify mathematical statements because
no one can see them they cannot persuade
anyone of the truth of a proposition any
more than an abstract virtual reality
generator that does not physically exist
can persuade people that they are in a
different environment or an abstract
computer can factorize a number for us a
mathematical theory of proofs would have
no bearing on which mathematical truths
can or cannot be proved in reality just
as a theory of abstract computation has
no bearing on what mathematicians or
anyone else can or cannot calculate in
reality unless there is a separate
empirical reason for believing that the
abstract computations in the theory
represent real computations computations
including the special computations that
qualify as proofs are physical processes
proof theories about how to ensure that
those processes correctly mimic the
abstract entities they are intended to
mimic girdles theorems have been hailed
as the first new theorems of pure logic
for two thousand years but that is not
so good or theorems are about what can
cannot be proved and proof is a physical
process nothing improved theory is a
matter of logic alone the new way in
which girdle managed to prove general
assertions about proofs depends on
certain assumptions about which physical
processes can or cannot represent an
abstract fact
in a way that an observer can detect and
be convinced by girdle distilled such
assumptions into his explicit antosha
rules of his results his results were
self evidently justified not because
they are pure logic but because
mathematicians found the assumption
self-evident skipping more and just
getting to the part that I think I've
quoted more from the fabric of reality
than any other section where David
writes that mathematicians throughout
the ages should have made various
mistakes about matters of proof and
certainty is only natural the present
discussion should lead us to expect that
the current view will not last forever
either but the confidence with which
mathematicians have blundered into these
mistakes and their inability to
acknowledge even the possibility of
error in these matters are I think
connected with an ancient and widespread
confusion between the methods of
mathematics and its subject matter let
me explain unlike the relationships
between physical entities relationships
between abstract entities are
independent of any contingent facts and
of any laws of physics they are
determined absolutely and objectively by
the autonomous properties of the
abstract entities themselves mathematics
the study of these relationships and
properties is therefore the study of
absolutely necessary truths now I'm just
going to pause and repeat that sentence
mathematics the study of these
relationships and properties is the
study of absolutely necessary truths
mathematics is the study of absolutely
necessary truths let me continue in
other words the truths that mathematics
studies are absolutely certain but this
does not mean that our knowledge of
those necessary truths is itself certain
nor does it mean that the methods of
mathematics confer necessary truth on
their conclusions after all mathematics
also studies falsehoods and paradoxes
then that does not mean that the
conclusions of such a study are
necessarily false or paradoxical next is
my favorite line of the entire chapter
and certainly up there with um
one of my favorite lines out of both
books David writes necessary truth is
merely the subject matter of mathematics
not the reward we get for doing
mathematics I love that that's brilliant
and I think I've quoted a hundred times
before necessary truth is merely the
subject-matter of mathematics not the
reward we get for doing mathematics the
objective of mathematics is not and
cannot be mathematical certainty it is
not even mathematical truth certain or
otherwise it is and must be mathematical
explanation so I'll just read the
conclusion now of this chapter I'm
skipping a little more and David writes
there are physical objects such as
fingers computers and brains whose
behavior can model that of certain
abstract objects in this way the fabric
of physical reality provides us with a
window on the world of abstractions it
is a very narrow window and gives us
only a limited range of perspectives
some of the structures that we see out
there such as the natural numbers or the
rules of inference of classical logic
seem to be important or fundamental to
the abstract world in the same way as
deep laws of nature are fundamental to
the physical world but that could be a
misleading appearance for what we are
really saying is only that some abstract
structures are fundamental to our
understanding of abstractions we have no
reason to suppose that those structures
are objectively significant in the
abstract world it is merely that some
abstract entities are nearer and more
easily visible from our window than
others now I'm just going to read also
his terminology section that he hasn't a
fabric ability as he does in the
beginning of infinity and so his
terminology includes mathematics which
he defines as the study of absolutely
necessary truths again the mathematics
is a study of necessary truth but it
doesn't mean that what you are able to
prove are necessary truths it's just the
study of them and so you get what you
get is fallible explanations of those
necessary truths he defines proof as in
the traditional way a way of
establishing the truth of mathematical
propositions or a sequence of statements
starting with some premises and ending
with the desired conclusion and
satisfied satisfying certain rules of
inference
or better yet a computation that models
the properties of some abstract entity
and whose outcome establishes that the
abstract entity has a given property
mathematical intuition he defines as in
the traditional sense an ultimate
self-evident source of justification for
mathematical reasoning and actually it's
a set of theories both conscious and
unconscious about the behavior of
certain physical objects whose behavior
models that of interesting abstract
entities and then he mentions our what's
called Hilbert's tenth problem in
Hilbert's tenth problem was whether or
not we could establish once and for all
the certitude of mathematical methods by
finding a set of rules of inference
sufficient for all valid proofs and then
proving those rules consistent by their
own standards and then girdles
incompleteness theorem is a proof that
Hubert's tends problem cannot be solved
for any set of rules of inference there
are valid proofs not designated as valid
by those rules so that's it that's the
reality of abstractions chapter 5 the
beginning infinity with some material
from chapter 10 of the fabric of reality
next I'll move on to chapter 6
universality but I hope you enjoyed that
extended appendices I guess to chapter 5
see you next time